Add SetFit ABSA (#1654)
huggingface/blog: setfit-absa.md

---
title: "SetFitABSA: Few-Shot Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis using SetFit"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/setfit-absa/intel_hf_logo.png

> authors:

Reviewer: Remember to mark guests as guests :)

Author: thanks!

| Text                                                                          | Label |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------|
| Waiters:Waiters aren’t friendly but the cream pasta is out of this world.     | NEG   |
| cream pasta:Waiters aren't friendly but the cream pasta is out of this world. | POS   |
| ...                                                                           | ...   |

Note that as opposed to the aspect extraction model, we don’t include non-aspects in this training set because the goal is to classify the sentiment polarity towards real aspects.

## Running inference

At inference time, the test sentence passes through the aspect candidate extraction, resulting in test instances using the template `aspect_candidate:test_sentence`. Next, non-aspects are filtered by the aspect/non-aspect classifier. Finally, the extracted aspects are fed to the sentiment polarity classifier that predicts the sentiment polarity per aspect.

```
Input test sentence: "their dinner specials are fantastic."
```

**Model Output**

```
['their', 'dinner', 'specials', 'are', 'fantastic', '.'],
[‘O’, B-ASP, I-ASP, ‘O’, ‘O’, ‘O’],

> [‘O’, ‘positive’, ‘positive’, ‘O’, ‘O’, ‘O’]

Reviewer 2: ```
[[{‘span’: ‘dinner specials’, ‘polarity’: ’positive’}]]
```

Author: Good catch! Fixed in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/1654/commits/28563fcaffbcd0d7b1ca2a3b2cd1f462189d7dea

---
title: "SetFitABSA: Few-Shot Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis using SetFit"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/setfit-absa/intel_hf_logo.png
authors:
- user: ronenlap
  guest: true
- user: tomaarsen
- user: lewtun
- user: dkorat
  guest: true
- user: orenpereg
  guest: true
- user: moshew
  guest: true
---

# SetFitABSA: Few-Shot Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis using SetFit

<p align="center">

>     <img src="assets/setfit-absa/method.png" width=500>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/setfit-absa/method.png" width=500>
```

Reviewer 3: The image is displayed again later in the post, is that intended?

Reviewer 4: I believe so, yes. The first one is meant as a bit of a header image, and the second one to help with explaining how the model works.

### Training

**1. Aspect candidate extraction**

In this work we assume that aspects, which are usually features of products and services, are mostly nouns or noun compounds (strings of consecutive nouns). We use spaCy (https://spacy.io/) to tokenize and extract nouns/noun compounds from the sentences in the (few-shot) training set. Since not all extracted nouns/noun compounds are aspects, we refer to them as aspect candidates.

**2. Aspect/Non aspect classification**

Now that we have aspect candidates, we need to train a model to be able to distinguish between nouns that are aspects and nouns that are non-aspects. For this purpose, we need training samples with aspect/no-aspect labels. This is done simply by labeling candidates that are labeled as aspects in the training set as TRUE aspects, while the rest are non-aspects and therefore labeled as FALSE as illustrated in the following example:

<p><strong>Training sentence:</strong> "Waiters aren't friendly but the cream pasta is out of this world."</p>
<p><strong>Tokenized:</strong> [Waiters, are, n't, friendly, but, the, cream, pasta, is, out, of, this, world, .]</p>

> <p><strong>Extracted aspect candidates:</strong> [Waiters, are, n't, friendly, but, the, cream, pasta, is, out, of, this, world, .]</p>

Reviewer 5: Are the tokens"waiters", "cream", "pasta" and "world" marked in bold or color as in the google doc?

<p><strong>Gold labels from training set, in BIO format:</strong> [B-ASP, O, O, O, O, O, B-ASP, I-ASP, O, O, O, O, O, .]</p>

> <p><strong>Generated aspect/non-aspect Labels:</strong> [Waiters, are, n't, friendly, but, the, cream, pasta, is, out, of, this, world, .]</p>

Reviewer 3: I'm not following here. Why are the "aspect candidates" and the "aspect/non-aspect labels" equal to the original tokenized text? Also, is the use of BIO format important at this stage? I think it'd be easier to understand if the final result showed true/false labels as described in the intro paragraph.

Reviewer 4: I've updated this according to our internal docs, i.e. I've added the colors that @orenpereg already mentioned.

Now that we have all the aspect candidates labeled, how do we use it to train the candidate aspect classification model? In other words, how do we use SetFit, a sentence classification framework, to classify individual tokens? Well, this is the trick: each aspect candidate is concatenated with the entire training sentence to create a training instance using the following template:

```
aspect_candidate:training_sentence
```

Applying the example above to the template, will generate 3 training instances – two with TRUE labels representing aspect training instances and one with FALSE label representing non-aspect training instance:

| Text                                                                          | Label |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------|
| Waiters:Waiters aren't friendly but the cream pasta is out of this world.     | 1     |
| cream pasta:Waiters aren't friendly but the cream pasta is out of this world. | 1     |
| world:Waiters aren't friendly but the cream pasta is out of this world.       | 0     |
| ...                                                                           | ...   |

> After generating the training instances, we are ready to use the power of SetFit to train a few-shot domain-specific binary classifier to extract aspects from an input text review.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After generating the training instances, we are ready to use the power of SetFit to train a few-shot domain-specific binary classifier to extract aspects from an input text review. This will be our first fine-tuned SetFit model.
```

Maybe a bit redundant, but I had to retrace when I read "2nd SetFit model" in the sentiment classification phase.

Another way to reinforce would be to use "SetFit Model 1" and "SetFit Model 2" in the method figure.

Reviewer 4: I like your proposal here, I'll add it.

**3. Sentiment polarity classification**

> Once the system extracts the aspects from the text, it needs to associate a sentiment polarity (e.g., positive, negative or neutral) to each aspect. For this purpose, we use a 2nd SetFit model and train it in a similar fashion to the aspect extraction model training as illustrated in the following example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once the system extracts the aspects from the text, it needs to associate a sentiment polarity (e.g., positive, negative or neutral) to each aspect. For this purpose, we use a 2nd SetFit model and train it in a similar fashion to the aspect extraction model as illustrated in the following example:
```

<p><strong>Training sentence:</strong> "Waiters aren't friendly but the cream pasta is out of this world."</p>
<p><strong>Tokenized:</strong> [Waiters, are, n't, friendly, but, the, cream, pasta, is, out, of, this, world, .]</p>
<p><strong>Gold labels from training set:</strong> [NEG, O, O, O, O, O, POS, POS, O, O, O, O, O, .]</p>

| Text                                                                          | Label |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------|
| Waiters:Waiters aren’t friendly but the cream pasta is out of this world.     | NEG   |
| cream pasta:Waiters aren't friendly but the cream pasta is out of this world. | POS   |
| ...                                                                           | ...   |

Note that as opposed to the aspect extraction model, we don’t include non-aspects in this training set because the goal is to classify the sentiment polarity towards real aspects.

## Running inference

> At inference time, the test sentence passes through the aspect candidate extraction, resulting in test instances using the template `aspect_candidate:test_sentence`. Next, non-aspects are filtered by the aspect/non-aspect classifier. Finally, the extracted aspects are fed to the sentiment polarity classifier that predicts the sentiment polarity per aspect.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At inference time, the test sentence passes through the spaCy aspect candidate extraction phase, resulting in test instances using the template `aspect_candidate:test_sentence`. Next, non-aspects are filtered by the aspect/non-aspect classifier. Finally, the extracted aspects are fed to the sentiment polarity classifier that predicts the sentiment polarity per aspect.
```

Maybe?

```
Input test sentence: "their dinner specials are fantastic."
```

**Model Output**

```
[
    [
        {"span": "dinner", "polarity": "positive"},

>         {"span": "specials", "polarity": "positive"},

Reviewer 3: I assume this comes from a post-processing phase. In the example of the training dataset we did not see the `span` or `polarity` fields. We also used different string representations for `positive` and `negative`.

Edit: we can refer to the training section that comes later. Still the labels are `pos` and `neg` there.

Reviewer 4: Resolved in f4c1158ce325bc4460a037046e26d91b56f934c5, renames the labels to "positive" and "negative" for clarity. The "span" corresponds with the aspect and the "polarity" with the label. Perhaps I should have used "label" in the output of the SetFitABSA model as well, but this should be okay.

We use the popular Laptop14 and Restaurant14 ABSA [datasets](https://huggingface.co/datasets/alexcadillon/SemEval2014Task4) from the Semantic Evaluation Challenge 2014 ([SemEval14](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hhwzSr5CNunAU5wmtN8dcrL4AUskesRw/edit#bookmark=id.30j0zll)).
SetFitABSA is evaluated both on the intermediate task of aspect term extraction (SB1) and on the full ABSA task of aspect extraction along with their sentiment polarity predictions (SB1+SB2).

### Model size comparison

|       Model        | Size (params) |
|:------------------:|:-------------:|
|    Llama-2-chat    |      7B       |
|      T5-base       |     220M      |
|     GPT2-base      |     124M      |
|    GPT2-medium     |     355M      |
| **SetFit (MPNet)** |     110M      |

### Performance comparison

We see a clear advantage of SetFitABSA when the number of training instances is low, despite being 2x smaller than T5 and x3 smaller than GPT2-medium.  Even when compared to Llama 2, which is x64 larger, the performance is on par or better.

**SetFitABSA vs GPT2**

<p align="center">

>     <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/SetFitABSA_vs_GPT2.png" width=700>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/setfit-absa/SetFitABSA_vs_GPT2.png" width=700>
```

</p>

**SetFitABSA vs T5**

<p align="center">

>     <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/SetFitABSA_vs_T5.png" width=700>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/setfit-absa/SetFitABSA_vs_T5.png" width=700>
```

</p>

> Note that the baseline works use different numbers of training sentences and different data splits. For fair comparison, we conducted separate comparisons with our model against each of them, ensuring consistency by using the splits employed by each respective work for accurate assessments.

Reviewer 3: Is that what the plots show? I thought it was our method, seeing just a few training sentences in the X axis.

Reviewer 4: I think it just means that SetFitABSA was compared against specifically the splits used by the other works, and the results of that are shown in the plots.

**SetFitABSA vs Llama2**

<p align="center">

>     <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/SetFitABSA_vs_Llama2.png" width=700>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/setfit-absa/SetFitABSA_vs_Llama2.png" width=700>
```

</p>

> We notice that increasing the number of in-context training samples for Llama2 did not result in improved performance. This phenomenon has been shown for ChatGPT in [this blog post](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2023/09/power-of-llms-zero-shot-and-few-shot-prompting/), however it should be further investigated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We notice that increasing the number of in-context training samples for Llama2 did not result in improved performance. This phenomenon [has been shown for ChatGPT before](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2023/09/power-of-llms-zero-shot-and-few-shot-prompting/), and we think it should be further investigated.
```

For example, the training text "Restaurant with wonderful food but worst service I ever seen" contains two aspects, so will add two lines to the training set table:

| Text                                                         | Span    | Label | Ordinal |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------|:--------|:------|:--------|
| Restaurant with wonderful food but worst service I ever seen | food    | pos   | 0       |
| Restaurant with wonderful food but worst service I ever seen | service | neg   | 0       |
| ...                                                          | ...     | ...   | ...     |

Once we have the training dataset ready we can create an ABSA trainer and execute the training:

```python
from setfit import AbsaTrainer, AbsaModel

# Create training dataset as above
training_dataset = ...

# Create a model with a chosen sentence transformer from the hub
model = AbsaModel.from_pretrained(
	"sentence-transformers/paraphrase-mpnet-base-v2")

# Create a trainer:
trainer = AbsaTrainer(model, train_dataset=training_dataset)
# Execute training:
train.train()

> ```

Reviewer 3: Brief guidance on hardware requirements would be great here. I'm assuming this is quite approachable.

Reviewer 4: I've added a section on training time and hardware, i.e. that the SetFitABSA model trains in about 10 minutes on the free T4 from Google Colab.

That’s it! We have trained a domain-specific ABSA model. We can save our trained model to disk or upload it to the Hugging Face hub. Bare in mind that the model contains two sub models, so each is given its own path:

```python
model.save_pretrained(
			"models/setfit-absa-model-aspect", 
			"models/setfit-absa-model-polarity"

> )

Reviewer 3: Ohhh, nice

# or
model.push_to_hub(
			"tomaarsen/setfit-absa-model-aspect",
			"tomaarsen/setfit-absa-model-polarity"
)
```

Now we can use our trained model for inference. We start by loading the model:

```python
from setfit import AbsaModel

model = AbsaModel.from_pretrained(
			"tomaarsen/setfit-absa-model-aspect",
			"tomaarsen/setfit-absa-model-polarity"
)
```

> Then, we use the predict API to execute the inference. The input is a list of strings, each representing a textual review:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then, we use the predict API to rub inference. The input is a list of strings, each representing a textual review:
```

## How does it work?

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/setfit-absa/method.png" width=700>
</p>
<p align="center">
    <em>SetFitABSA's three-stage training process</em>
</p>

SetFitABSA is comprised of three steps. The first step extracts aspect candidates from the text, the second one yields the aspects by classifying the aspect candidates as aspects or non-aspects, and the final step associates a sentiment polarity to each extracted aspect. Steps two and three are based on SetFit models.

### Training

**1. Aspect candidate extraction**

In this work we assume that aspects, which are usually features of products and services, are mostly nouns or noun compounds (strings of consecutive nouns). We use [spaCy](https://spacy.io/) to tokenize and extract nouns/noun compounds from the sentences in the (few-shot) training set. Since not all extracted nouns/noun compounds are aspects, we refer to them as aspect candidates.

**2. Aspect/Non-aspect classification**

> Now that we have aspect candidates, we need to train a model to be able to distinguish between nouns that are aspects and nouns that are non-aspects. For this purpose, we need training samples with aspect/no-aspect labels. This is done by considering aspects in the training set as `True` aspects, while other non-overlapping extracted candidate aspects rest are non-aspects and therefore labeled as `False`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that we have aspect candidates, we need to train a model to be able to distinguish between nouns that are aspects and nouns that are non-aspects. For this purpose, we need training samples with aspect/no-aspect labels. This is done by considering aspects in the training set as `True` aspects, while other non-overlapping candidate aspects are considered non-aspects and therefore labeled as `False`:
```

There was a extraneous `rest` in the last sentence.

* **Extracted aspect candidates:** [<strong style="color:orange">Waiters</strong>, are, n't, friendly, but, the, <strong style="color:orange">cream</strong>, <strong style="color:orange">pasta</strong>, is, out, of, this, <strong style="color:orange">world</strong>, .]
* **Gold labels from training set, in [BIO format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inside–outside–beginning_(tagging)):** [B-ASP, O, O, O, O, O, B-ASP, I-ASP, O, O, O, O, O, .]
* **Generated aspect/non-aspect Labels:** [<strong style="color:green">Waiters</strong>, are, n't, friendly, but, the, <strong style="color:green">cream</strong>, <strong style="color:green">pasta</strong>, is, out, of, this, <strong style="color:red">world</strong>, .]

Now that we have all the aspect candidates labeled, how do we use it to train the candidate aspect classification model? In other words, how do we use SetFit, a sentence classification framework, to classify individual tokens? Well, this is the trick: each aspect candidate is concatenated with the entire training sentence to create a training instance using the following template:

```
aspect_candidate:training_sentence
```

> Applying the example above to the template, will generate 3 training instances – two with `True` labels representing aspect training instances and one with `False` label representing non-aspect training instance:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Applying the template to the example above will generate 3 training instances – two with `True` labels representing aspect training instances, and one with `False` label representing non-aspect training instance:
```

```

## Benchmarking

SetFitABSA was benchmarked against the recent state-of-the-art work by [AWS AI Labs](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2210.06629.pdf) and [Salesforce AI Research](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hhwzSr5CNunAU5wmtN8dcrL4AUskesRw/edit#bookmark=id.3znysh7) that finetune T5 and GPT2 using prompts. To get a more complete picture, we also compare our model to the Llama-2-chat model using in-context learning.
We use the popular Laptop14 and Restaurant14 ABSA [datasets](https://huggingface.co/datasets/alexcadillon/SemEval2014Task4) from the Semantic Evaluation Challenge 2014 ([SemEval14](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hhwzSr5CNunAU5wmtN8dcrL4AUskesRw/edit#bookmark=id.30j0zll)).
SetFitABSA is evaluated both on the intermediate task of aspect term extraction (SB1) and on the full ABSA task of aspect extraction along with their sentiment polarity predictions (SB1+SB2).

### Model size comparison

|       Model        | Size (params) |
|:------------------:|:-------------:|
|    Llama-2-chat    |      7B       |
|      T5-base       |     220M      |
|     GPT2-base      |     124M      |
|    GPT2-medium     |     355M      |

> | **SetFit (MPNet)** |     110M      |

Reviewer 3: does this include the two SetFit models?

Reviewer 4: It does not! Well spotted, this is just the one. I'll replace it with 220M (or perhaps `2x 110M`?)

Reviewer 3: I think `2 x 110M` might be clearer? Then we'd have to change the comments below about being half the size of `T5` :(

Reviewer 4: @rlaperdo clarified in a comment on the commit:
> It is true that for the entire ABSA model the size is 220M and this is valid for evaluating a complete flow, i.e. SB1+SB2. However many absa tasks evaluate only aspect extraction (SB1) or aspect polarity (SB2). For these tasks the model size is still 110M, as training aspect_model is independent from the training of the polarity_model.

Reviewer 4: I've clarified the situation with "2x 110M" and an additional comment.

**SetFitABSA vs Llama2**

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/setfit-absa/SetFitABSA_vs_Llama2.png" width=700>
</p>

We notice that increasing the number of in-context training samples for Llama2 did not result in improved performance. This phenomenon [has been shown for ChatGPT before](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2023/09/power-of-llms-zero-shot-and-few-shot-prompting/), and we think it should be further investigated.

## Training your own model

SetFitABSA is part of the SetFit framework. To train an ABSA model, start by installing `setfit` with the `absa` option enabled:

```shell
python -m pip install -U "setfit[absa]"
```
Additionally, we must install the `en_core_web_lg` spaCy model:
```shell
python -m spacy download en_core_web_lg
```

We continue by preparing the training set. The format of the training set is a `Dataset` with the columns `text`, `span`, `label`, `ordinal`:

* **text**: The full sentence or text containing the aspects. 
* **span**: An aspect from the full sentence. Can be multiple words. For example: "food".

> * **label**: The (polarity) label corresponding to the aspect span. For example: "positive". The labels names can be chosen arbitrarily when tagging the collected training data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **label**: The (polarity) label corresponding to the aspect span. For example: "positive". The label names can be chosen arbitrarily when tagging the collected training data.
```

> * **ordinal**: If the aspect span occurs multiple times in the text, then this ordinal represents the index of those occurrences. Often this is just 0, as usually aspect appears only once in the input text.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **ordinal**: If the aspect span occurs multiple times in the text, then this ordinal represents the index of those occurrences. Often this is just 0, as each aspect usually appears only once in the input text.
```
